From The New York [music] Times, I'm
Michael Barbaro. This is The Daily.
>> Across the country and here in South
Central [music] Pennsylvania, church
leaders say they're seeing a noticeable
shift.
>> [music]
>> Gen Z is returning to faith, but in ways
you might not expect. Report
>> You're seeing the largest number of
converts in recent history
>> Young New Yorkers have a new hot spot.
Sunday
>> [music]
>> mass.
>> We're learning that for the first time
in decades, faith in this [music]
country appears to be growing.
>> After decades of declining church
attendance and a profound rise in
secularism.
>> I was like, can I maybe go to a church
[music] service with you just to like
see what it's like?
>> Religion is having a moment
>> [music]
>> in America.
>> I think we do start to question like,
why is this happening?
>> Today, producer Astha Chaturvedi
>> [music]
>> talks to our colleague Lauren Jackson
about why more and more [music]
Americans are now choosing to believe.
>> [music]
>> It's Tuesday, May 12th.
>> Hey Lauren.
>> Hi, how are you?
>> I'm good.
>> to see you in this space.
>> Oh, uh yeah, let's see how fun it is.
>> I love this angle.
>> Um
>> [laughter]
>> it feels like so much of the
conversation about religion in the last
few years and even The Daily's coverage
of religion has been about how
politicized it has become, especially on
the right.
>> True.
>> There was a recent face-off between the
Pope and the President, but I'm also
thinking about the overturning of Roe v.
Wade, battles at the Southern Baptist
Convention over female pastors and IVF.
Some of these episodes I've produced for
The Daily.
But you haven't been reporting on
religion from that angle. Instead,
you've been reporting on faith itself
and how and why people in America
believe.
And I want to understand how all of this
started for you and why you decided to
begin reporting on this now.
>> Yeah, there have been so many stories in
the last few years of the ascendancy of
a very muscular conservative
Christianity and the ways in which that
is expressing itself in politics. I'm
interested in all of them, but I was
really interested in how most people in
America wrestle with these really big
questions of religion and spirituality
and how they appear in their lives,
their families, and communities. And as
I started to look into that, something
really dramatic emerged in my reporting,
which was there is something hugely
significant happening sociologically and
demographically
within America when it comes to American
spirituality and religiosity. And that
is that we know people across the
political spectrum,
young and old, are expressing a renewed
interest
in spirituality and in religiosity.
We've seen for the first time since Pew
Research has been gathering data on
religion that people have stopped
leaving churches.
In essence, secularization is paused.
>> So, it's not an uptick in churchgoing,
but kind of a flattening out.
>> Yeah, and that sounds like it's
insignificant, it's just a pause, but
it's a really big moment for people's
personal relationships to religion and
spirituality. We know that in the early
'90s, 90% of American adults identified
as Christian, according to Pew.
That number dropped basically over my
lifetime to be only about 2/3 of
Americans. It was called the great
de-churching. It was the largest and
fastest shift in American religiosity on
record. And some people estimate that 40
million people left American churches.
So, what demographers and sociologists
had said for years was going to be the
definitive decline of religiosity in
America. That has stopped. It has paused
over the past five years. And we
actually got some new data in the last
few weeks and months that really made
this picture even more interesting.
>> How so?
>> We had expected that every cohort coming
up, so every new group of young adults
would be less religious than their
parents or their grandparents. But Pew
published a report that shows, if you
actually look at the youngest group of
Americans, so 18 to 23-year-olds,
there signs that that group is even more
likely, and it's slight, but it's it's
more likely to attend religious services
at least once a month than those just
older than them.
>> Mhm.
>> Wow.
>> separately, we got a new survey from
Gallup that found a sharp rise in the
share of men under 30 who say that
religion is, quote, very important to
them. It went from 28% in 2023 to 42% in
2025.
>> That's a huge jump.
>> It is. And it was surprising as well
because historically we've seen that
young women tend to be more religious
than young men.
That's changing.
>> So, a lot of numbers pointing in a
similar direction. How should we be
looking at them in aggregate? How are
you seeing this moment?
>> It's a really good question, and it's
one that has sparked a lot of debate
both in the pages of the New York Times
and also in the people I'm speaking to
on the religion beat. You know, plenty
of people have declared this a revival.
That's a strong word, and plenty of
other people have said that is very
premature and potentially erroneous.
But what we do know is that this trend
continues. So, in 2025, the
non-religious share of the American
population declined yet again.
And the number of atheists and agnostics
is back down to the levels we saw in
2014. That's close to 15 years ago.
>> Wow.
>> We do have signs that this shift is
happening more on the right,
particularly among young men.
But we're also seeing this across the
political spectrum. And if you take a
step back, this is not just about
Christianity. It's about all other major
religions as well.
>> Mhm.
>> So, the main takeaway is that the story
of faith and religion and belief in this
country is really at an inflection
point.
>> And as I said, you've been examining
what's been driving all of this. You've
been talking to people about what they
believe and why they believe it.
I can imagine that these conversations
are quite intimate.
>> I often say I feel like I'm
part reporter, part therapist, cuz it
[laughter] takes
um a lot of attention and a lot of time
to attend to these stories. They're so
intimate. They're so personal. And it's
also personal for me. My life, in a way,
mirrors the shifts we've been seeing in
Americans' attitudes toward religion and
also their religious practices over the
past three decades.
>> Could you tell me a little bit about
your journey?
>> I was raised in a very, very
conservative and very religious place. I
was raised in Little Rock, Arkansas.
I was raised a devout Mormon, or member
of the Church [music] of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints.
And my family was
really practicing. When I was, you know,
a little girl, I used to write and send
articles to the church magazines because
my dream job was to work as a writer for
the church magazines.
>> Wow.
>> In high school, I had a 6:00 a.m. Bible
study that I attended every day before
school.
>> That's early.
>> 6:00 Yeah.
>> Oh my gosh.
>> Um I was always late. I was always late.
I mean, I it's astonishing that I didn't
crash on the freeway every day when I
was just careening down the highway to
get there on time cuz if I didn't
graduate from this seminary class, I
couldn't attend the big
>> [music]
>> church university called Brigham Young
University. So I I had to make it.
>> Mhm.
>> I was expected to attend and I expected
myself for my whole life to attend, find
someone to marry,
have children and raise them in the
church.
So it was [music] an extraordinary shift
when I decided to attend a secular
university.
>> Was that a big deal in your family?
>> It was a huge deal. I had a guidance
counselor who nudged me and nudged me
and nudged me and finally I relented and
decided to apply for a scholarship and
when I got it, I was really surprised by
how moved I was by the environment, how
much I thought I wanted to learn in that
space. And so ultimately I decided to
go, but I was terrified.
And that was a really really hard
transition for me. It was
extraordinarily difficult for me to not
only leave that community, but begin to
[music]
challenge
a faith and an ideology that was really
comprehensive.
>> What did that look like?
>> The first week I was there, I fell in
love with someone who was not a member
of my faith [music] and
it's a know, very common rupture for a
lot of people who then have to begin
[music] to question
what it is they believe in and how they
can negotiate the boundaries of that.
>> Because the way you were raised, it was
like, yeah, you were meant to be with
someone from the same faith.
>> Absolutely. [music]
I also encountered ideas, you know, I
um in a political science class read
Isaiah Berlin on pluralism, the idea
that
>> [music]
>> many truths and realities are equally
valid and worthy of consideration
[music] and examination.
And that really cracked my world open.
That idea, that concept, that there was
not one true church, there could be many
possible truths.
And for [music] me personally, that you
know, was the beginning of a huge
reckoning, [music] one that continued as
I attended graduate school abroad.
And
at the age of 25, I ultimately formally
[music] left the church.
>> How does that affect your relationship
with your family, given how you were
raised?
>> I mean,
of course, if a parent truly and deeply
believes that
a religion is is true and is the best
path to follow, and they desperately
love their child, they're going to want
their child to follow it. So, it was an,
you know, an exercise in empathy and
trying to understand and really accept
my parents' perspective, while also
holding my own.
>> gospel, too. And as you
>> Mom, I I need you to know that I am
grateful for the many positive things
and many ways that being Mormon has
brought me.
I'm no longer choosing to be Mormon.
>> Okay, that sounds good to you.
But what you're pushing back is this
flow of happiness, joy, inspiration.
>> conversations.
But I knew even then that these were
really important moments in my life,
and that I wanted to remember them
accurately, so I recorded them. I'm
telling you right now,
it's not a healthy institution for me
and many, many, many people. I do not
want to participate, and that is the
healthiest choice for me, for many
reasons.
I'm asking you to honor that as my mom.
I was desperately wanting my parents to
not only understand, [music]
but also to approve of the life choices
that I'd made in leaving my faith.
>> Okay, I'm just asking if we could I
never got any chance to talk to you
about it.
>> But it's not
it's not a
it's not up for debate, okay? It's not
up for It's not a It's not a debate.
>> I guess the thing is that
>> And frankly, that's not something my
parents were willing to offer because
they deeply believe in
the worldview and the faith that they
believe in and that they were raised in
and that they live every day.
>> I think if you put that over [music]
here and you had ever experienced
feeling the Holy Spirit,
then you would get
what I'm talking about. But if you don't
have
like room in your heart to just try and
listen, then
>> And so,
they want me to participate in that. I
love you.
Love to you looks like being
exceptionally perceptive.
They felt like my rejection of that
faith was a rejection of them.
And that led to a good lot of conflict.
>> know. I guess if there was a sunset,
sometimes you say to somebody, "Come see
the sunset." cuz you get excited. And
that's all, you know?
You can make it sound
so
demeaning, but it's like a sunset to me.
It's like
Wait a second.
Let's not go look at
the bush. Let's look at the sunset.
That's how I feel like.
Okay, I've got a different view of the
sunset.
I've got my own sunset. It's pretty
great.
>> [music]
>> So, you were on a different path, a part
of this great de-churching,
what did faith look like to you at that
point?
>> I mean, yeah, yeah, I stopped going to
church, but I didn't stop searching for
answers to the big life questions that
plague us all.
And that made me like most Americans.
Almost everyone believes in something,
whether that's religious or not.
The most recent Pew survey said that 92%
of Americans say that they believe in a
god, spirits, souls, or an afterlife.
But only 30% of Americans actually
attend a house of worship weekly.
So, like most Americans, I found meaning
outside of religion.
>> Mhm.
>> I threw myself into work. I did what I'd
always wanted to do, which was be a
journalist. I was really motivated by
the mission of The New York Times. I
worked all the time, all the time.
I also worked out as much as possible in
my off time. I hiked, I went to workout
classes, SoulCycle, CrossFit.
These expensive workout classes that
promised not just a healthier body, but
also a better life.
>> Mhm.
>> I never got into astrology, but I
understood why so many people,
especially young women, had downloaded
Co-Star, the astrology app.
>> I've had so many conversations over the
years about astrology and about Mercury
>> Yeah, Mercury seems to always be in
retrograde, but I get it. It helps
explain the messiness of life. It
promises that there's some sort of
cosmic alchemy to the chaos, and who
doesn't want that?
>> Mhm.
>> And the more I spoke to people, the more
I traveled, I couldn't shake a really
ingrained worldview that I had, which
was one in which I saw belief and
spirituality, I saw it everywhere.
>> The people in power are obviously scared
of the truth. [music]
Yet, no matter how hard they try, they
cannot escape from it.
>> You know, standing at a climate rally
with Greta Thunberg on stage at COP in
Glasgow, there was a reverence in the
crowd.
>> This is what leadership looks like.
>> [music]
[cheering]
>> A desire for deliverance in the crowd
that felt distinctly religious to me.
I saw it in the intensity [music]
of how people
gravitated to social justice and campus
activism movements where like you had
[music] a sense of what was right and
wrong.
I felt it at the Eras Tour.
>> [screaming]
>> What are people feeling if not an
extraordinary ecstatic form [music] of
communal gathering rarely found outside
of religious spaces? [music]
>> After tonight,
when you hear these songs,
you're going to think about us
and the memories we made tonight on the
Eras Tour.
>> [music]
>> So while we had all this data that
millions of people had left American
religion,
it was still so clear to me that people
were looking for an outlet [music] for
their beliefs.
And then came the Pew report.
And that data seemed to show that some
people were reconsidering religion or
houses of worship as a place they could
turn to explore [music] those beliefs.
And so I started to talk to them to try
to figure out why.
>> We'll be right back.
>> Even though I did attend Catholic school
all through elementary and middle
school,
I felt like I was going through the
motions. I didn't really have a strong
faith of my own.
>> My parents, they were just like religion
is dumb. Like why would you believe
that? Like I remember I was really
little and I was like, "Oh, like what
happens after you die?" And they were
like, "Nothing.
You die."
>> [music]
>> So Lauren, what did people tell you
about what they were looking for and why
it led them to religion or back to
religion?
>> Everyone has their own story and it's
tough to make generalizations.
But as I talked [music]
to hundreds of people across the
country, a few themes did start to
emerge.
>> So I started college and my freshman
year is when the pandemic happened and
[music]
suddenly we were like inside all the
time and like I wasn't interacting with
that many people and I just like became
very depressed which was like a big
change for me. Like that was never
something
>> I think the biggest one that came up
again and again is that the pandemic was
a moment of extraordinary rupture in
American life.
>> Right at the beginning of COVID, my
nana, she lost her husband and her
oldest daughter just died. Like she was
standing there with a smile on her face
praising God and for me that was like
damn, I want that.
>> When we look at the Pew data, the moment
that we start to see secularization
level off or pause
is just about the exact same moment that
the pandemic started.
>> I'm looking at this and I'm like life is
full of so much uncertainty and I wish I
had like
some
way like mentally [music]
to like deal with that.
>> People were forced to contend with their
own mortality and look hard at the
questions that they had about how they
were living and if it was working for
them.
>> And a lot of people decided that it
wasn't working for them.
>> It wasn't.
>> Just the work that I'm doing. Like it
just feels like a lot of like corporate
[music]
Like I think my parents generation had a
much stronger belief that like [music]
work is good and like by working you are
making the world a better place. But
like my generation like a lot of us do
not feel that way. A lot of us see our
jobs as just a job. We don't see it as
an outlet for
like making meaning.
>> The community piece, I think, is the
piece that [music]
still aches, you know?
Um
>> I think many people have realized,
especially in the last few years,
that they really don't have the [music]
depth of community that they long for in
their lives.
>> We all live in these separate nuclear
homes with our nuclear families, and we
think this is like the pinnacle all of
>> [music]
>> first-world country success, but the
huge con of that is we're isolated.
>> I've been like, "Where's community?" All
my old undergrad friends have left, or
like, they're all just like in their own
little buckets. Do you know what I mean?
Like everyone's separate.
>> me, even though I left the church,
I feel
a pain I don't really know how to
describe. I think
>> I've had this like really strong desire
to like host barbecues like in my
apartment complex. I've like felt like I
could will a community into existence,
you know what I mean? Just like through
sheer personality. I could just like
invite a ton of people and host like a
big party, but I just like It's been 8
months now and I like haven't made a
move, you know what I mean?
>> When things go wrong, when
>> [music]
>> they get sick, when something really
hard happens, many people I talk [music]
to are looking for connection and
community that they're just not finding
>> [music]
>> in comments online. They want a meal
train. They want to give and receive
really tactile, meaningful care.
And they're looking for spaces that can
offer that.
>> In coming back to religion,
realizing that the High Holidays offers
a good structure for thinking about
the way I live my life, especially in
relationship.
And the secular world doesn't have a
good
There's no Hallmark card for I'm Sorry
Day. Uh and you don't give her a rubber
chicken,
and [clears throat]
I, and I think many people
feel lost without having to be
accountable for something. I mean, I
think
you know, guilt gets a bad rap, but I
feel guilty if I don't do that process
concerning your pepper.
>> And many people have said they're
reassessing the value of religion with
all of its built-in community, ritual,
and set of existential and spiritual
answers
>> [music]
>> to the meaning and purpose of life.
They're revisiting that whole package in
the process, even if that [music] comes
with the baggage of what are sometimes
deeply flawed institutions.
>> I've been to my church I've been to my
church
four times since being home in the last
like 7 or 8 months. And every time
pretty cathartic. And I go
these are my values. Like right in front
of me. I'm like, this is who I am and I
miss it and I want it, but I'm like
I don't know like
I really want it to be me that's
stepping into it and
it's just a big leap and it also
>> I would love to find a way to
have what I had then without
compromising who I feel I am.
I couldn't do it then and I don't I
don't know where to do it now.
>> Like I still want more. Like I still
want something to believe in.
>> So in addition to the pandemic and this
widespread sense of dissatisfaction,
there's another theme that has really
stuck out to me and it comes back to our
politics.
We all know that Trumpism has injected a
renewed energy and even sense of
ascendancy into conservative
Christianity over the past decade.
But what surprised me was I started
talking to and hearing from more and
more people on the left who said that
this political moment had also sparked a
renewed interest in their own faith.
>> Hey, how are you?
>> Hey, I'm doing well. Is now still a good
time?
>> Yeah. Um
>> And there's one person I spoke to who
really stood out to me and his name was
Nick Woomer Dietrick.
>> We attended mass reg- you know,
regularly, but I think they were going
more because that's just what
upperly mobile suburban professionals
did, you [clears throat] know, late
'80s, early '90s, right? And so
>> He's 46 years old. He's from North
Carolina and for much of his childhood
was a Catholic, but his family wasn't
particularly devout.
>> At that period of time in the church
like the the catechesis
of children was particularly just bad.
>> Around the time he entered high school,
the Catholic Church's sex abuse scandal
was really at the height of its
visibility in public life.
>> And so by ninth grade I was done with it
and I'm like
>> So he said he really did not want to go
to church anymore.
>> I don't believe in God. It's all
>> He fought with his parents and he'd kind
of pitched this personal crusade against
it.
>> And I became so insufferable I think
that my parents are like, "We've lost
this this battle
and we stopped going to church."
>> Yeah, okay.
>> So as an undergraduate I was as big
left-wing student activist
>> and you know, I He turned to schools, to
his workplace, to a meaningful job as a
public defender for a sense of purpose
in his life.
>> And just by happenstance I ended up
marrying
a woman who was much more devout than I
was, more of a
left-wing Catholic, but through the
process of our courtship
I convinced her that she should leave
and so
I would say I was actively hostile to
it.
>> Yeah.
>> For for for decades.
>> Yeah. Then something shifted for him
when Trump was elected in 2016.
>> You know, I had to like kind of come
back and be like, "Like what the hell
happened?
And try to understand like who are these
people who voted for him.
And I did a lot of things, you know,
like kind of self-reflection on
why half of America hates the Democrats
and and and people like me.
>> What shifted? What changed for him?
>> One, he didn't see the election results
coming.
And it really upended some key
assumptions for him
about where he thought the country was
headed.
>> You know, so I started to read some of
these guys who are right-wing kind of
influencers or people like just go to
some Twitter accounts and everything.
And I guess what I realized is it's like
that kind of really nasty kind of
godless I think those some of those guys
are just so profoundly evil to me.
They've got
you know, what they call race realism
stuff and it's like
>> He also found himself disturbed by the
tenor of the discussion and the
discourse around politics, social and
cultural issues online.
>> And it's like, you know, basically you
need to have solidarity with people who
are like you. And of course that just
happens to be
white people or whatever and it scared
[music] the out of me.
Ross Douthat had some blog posts once
where he's like, "If you hated
[clears throat] the religious right,
you're really going to hate the
irreligious right."
>> And he thinks really deeply about the
best way to counter what he sees as a
kind of toxicity.
>> And it kind of made me realize that
without having a transcendent
ideology that's universalistic
and grounded in
something common for all of humanity,
we inevitably fall into this kind of us
against them
world and
that just seems very poisonous to me.
So, the alternative to that
is, you know, a universalistic
religion where all, you know, equal,
we're all created in the image of God.
And so, that's what I felt like I
needed.
>> [music]
>> So, to answer the despair that Nick has
been feeling about American politics,
he's starting to turn to faith. This
thing that he's been openly hostile to
for so long.
What does that look like? Well, he takes
steps slowly at first in the middle of
the night, in secret. And because he was
too embarrassed to admit he was going
down these rabbit holes, he found
himself watching religious videos online
alone.
>> Hi, my name is Father Mike Schmitz, and
this is Ascension Presents. So, a little
while back
>> I think I remember reading
in the Times it was like an interview
with this priest named Mike Schmitz from
Minneapolis. He's got all these
popular Catholic podcasts, and he makes
YouTube videos every week.
>> One of the things I hate
one of the things you probably hate is
like when we find weakness in ourselves,
or when we just find ourselves like
powerless
>> [music]
>> to do what we want to do, you know?
Where
>> And so, I started
>> [music]
>> watching some of his videos, and I was
just hate-watching them.
You know, like, "Oh, well, what's this
saying, right?"
>> And one of the things that God wants for
[music] us and with us more than
anything else is he wants to be in
relationship with us. And he wants us to
be in relationship with other people.
>> I'd watch him, and I'm like, "Okay,
well, this is a good thing. Terrible."
>> Nothing we can do [music] can fully
break any kind of relationship with God.
We're
>> I've spoken to quite a few people who
point to Father Schmitz as someone very
accessible for them [music] in
re-examining the merits of a religious
life.
>> And so, he was kind of like my gateway
>> [music]
>> Yeah.
>> into it.
>> You have freedom. You have power.
And you can start living that freedom,
and start living that power today.
>> [music]
>> And it was it was like my secret my
dirty secret, right? Like
like
left his political commitments, which
included like a heavy dose of
atheism, and it was such a central part
of like my persona.
>> Mhm.
>> Then I I was like ashamed to admit that
I was
doing this.
>> Yeah. Finally, he comes to the sense
that he wants to reconnect in some way
to a faith community.
>> Eventually, last April, Easter came and
went.
And I just We didn't do anything. We
didn't mark it cuz we weren't Christian.
I just
I just felt really bad like that we
hadn't
We're just hanging out, right? The
the utter lack of spiritual significance
of this It just felt
icky to me.
>> Mhm.
>> And so
I was sitting in my office. I've been
thinking about emailing the diocese and
being like, "What do I do?"
But I always just put it off. And then I
just went I I snapped. I emailed them
and I said,
>> Mhm.
>> "I want to do a general
confession, which is like
>> actually contacts a church, and he's
talking to a priest, and he says, "Hey,
I'm open to coming back, but I have a
block."
>> a real hard time just
getting to the
believing in God.
>> Mhm. And the block is, I don't believe
in God.
And that feels like a pretty significant
problem when it comes to living a
religious life or living a Catholic
life.
>> And he said, "Well,
here's what you do. Just start reading
the Gospels." And I said, "Well, no,
I've read all those, right?" And he's
like, "No." He's like, "You know, you
have to read them
like with an open heart as if this is
giving you some sort of spiritual
insight, not as a an academic exercise."
>> Mhm.
>> I said, "Okay. All right." And he's
like, "And then you have to start coming
to mass. You just have to do it. Just
dive in."
>> [music]
>> So, what did he do?
>> He did what the priest said, and he
continued to try.
>> So, I go on Amazon, I order a Catholic
Bible. I still told like nobody about
this at all.
>> Huh.
>> It took me like a week and a half. I had
to tell my wife. I was like, "Guess what
I did last Friday?" She was like,
"What?" I said, "I met with a priest."
>> [music]
>> And she goes, "Why?"
>> Mhm.
>> That's weird.
And so, that was an awkward
conversation.
>> He buys a Bible, and he starts going to
church,
>> [music]
>> but he does all of this very quietly.
>> And how do you account for his impulse
to keep it all a secret? Is it just as
simple as not wanting to come off as a
hypocrite to his family?
I think potentially in part. He said as
much.
>> When I was when I was just randomly
going and that was kind of a weird
thing.
>> Mhm.
>> Because it was hard. It was hard to
admit that I'd
just
screwed up.
You know, like you just feel like you go
from [music] being so excited about one
thing and then doing a 180.
>> Mhm.
>> And that's a little bit
you you feel a little bit silly.
>> Yeah.
>> You know, he had spent much of his life
making an intellectual argument against
the church, that there was no value in
prayer or church attendance on Sunday,
but what really mattered instead were
political commitments to progressive
causes that he felt would reform
society.
>> Two years ago I'd say, "Well, what we
need to do is change structures, right?
So,
what we really need to do is, you know,
take over the state, you know, and and
create a safety net. Or whatever, you
know, like we need to have state power
so that we can fix these problems. It's
not your job as an individual and in
fact if you do
>> And here he was reevaluating all of
that.
>> But, to ignore the individual component
and your individual ethical
responsibility
is really wrong.
>> Mhm.
>> I think. And so, Christianity also it it
it gives you kind of a broader vision,
but it's, you know, again, it's a it's a
very personal
>> Mhm.
>> thing, too. I mean, you know, my
>> You know, as flawed as Nick thought the
church is and as much as he rebelled
against it,
he started to see Christianity as
something that he thought could make the
world just a little bit better.
>> Like, you know what? Like, this worked
really well for a long period of time.
And we're in this moment after say this
post-war era where you've had all these
great innovations and I think we're
starting to realize that it doesn't seem
very durable anymore. Yeah. You know,
Marxism doesn't tell you a whole lot
about what you should do with your life.
Christianity does.
>> Yeah.
>> [music]
>> And this reconciliation of his past
worldview with a new one, it wasn't
easy, but he did keep trying.
>> I just, you know, I like the I like the
the the the smells and the bells and the
aesthetics of it. You know, it's the
religion of half my ancestors.
>> And in the process, he found something
that was really meaningful to him.
>> By going through the motions
and kind of absorbing
>> [music]
>> and reading sacred scripture and with a
different attitude,
I feel like I I have
a faith,
like a genuine faith
>> Mhm.
>> in God now.
>> Lauren, Nick's conversion seems very
powerful.
But just because people believe in
something doesn't necessarily guarantee
that they'll suddenly rush to church or
to the mosque or to the synagogue or
temple.
We are now only seeing the numbers level
off and while that's significant, as
you've said, it's not definitive or
predictive, right? There's no guarantee
that we're going to see a great rebound
in people returning to some established
religion.
>> Of course, and I want to be very clear.
We are not seeing a revival of
religiosity.
What I am hearing about is a renewed
interest or a new renewed curiosity in
religion.
For example, even chaplains at Harvard
tell me that in the last 25 years, they
haven't seen this much interest in
religion on campus.
>> Mhm.
>> We're also seeing religious references
appear more frequently throughout
American life, and I think that's most
visible at the very top of the Trump
administration.
You think about J.D. Vance, who's been
very public about his conversion to
Catholicism in recent years. He's
publishing a book on the subject soon.
>> Right.
>> Think about Pete Hegseth, Secretary of
War, who is invoking Christianity in
speaking publicly about the war in Iran.
>> Mhm.
>> So, it's a big part of the Trump
administration, but it's become a bigger
part of our politics in general.
>> There are 11 days remaining until
election day.
I will be a Muslim man in New York City
each of those 11 days, and every day
that follows after that.
>> In New York, for example, Mayor Eric
Adams has been very frontal and open,
and he has been throughout his campaign,
about his Islamic faith.
>> is the Prophet Muhammad, peace be upon
him,
was a stranger, too,
who fled Mecca and was welcomed in
Medina.
>> He's now in office hosting iftars during
Ramadan, and he's praying in public.
>> Many think of this month solely as the
time where we fast from sunup to
sundown.
And yet, for me, and I know for so many
of you,
it is a month where we also get to
reflect on who we are.
>> That's new, you know, for a long time, I
think since 2001, really, that would
have been seen as a liability.
>> Religion is not just about other people
who lived a long time ago.
Religion is about us
in the here and now.
>> And then, you know, if you look to the
south, look at Texas State
Representative James Talarico, who
obviously has been in the news a lot.
He's won the Democratic primary for a
Texas Senate seat.
>> Christian nationalists
walk around with a mouthful of scripture
and a heartful of hate.
>> He's been talking about the Christian
gospel as a way to combat the rise of
what he derides as Christian
nationalism.
And he's really encouraging voters to
see Christianity as the foundation for a
more compassionate form of economic
populism.
>> What would Jesus do about a tax system
that benefits the rich over the poor?
>> You know, he's a seminarian. He really
knows the Bible and he's really quoting
it in a way that we haven't seen in a
long time from a candidate in the
Democratic Party.
>> Right, it was so interesting to see
Tallerico. [music]
>> All right, James. I'm doing well. How
are you?
>> kind of school
Joe Rogan a few months ago about
Christianity.
>> It's always um
interesting to see a person who is a
Christian who is uh not for the Ten
Commandments in schools.
>> Yeah. In all of Jesus' teachings, he's
always focused on the outsider, the
outcast, the person who's left out, the
person who's different.
>> And in general, to see
all these young political leaders pushed
to counter the dominance around
conversations
that we've seen so long on the political
right.
>> Yeah, exactly. And beyond politics
>> The Pope is dead.
>> [music]
>> The throne
is vacant.
>> We're also seeing this in Hollywood. Did
you know there's a rabbi here?
>> No
>> Yeah.
>> Where?
>> He has a beard and he was definitely
judging me.
>> Sounds like a rabbi.
>> And in pop music, I'm thinking
especially of Justin Bieber and of
Rosalía,
>> [music]
>> who has a new album out called Lux,
which was released to high critical
acclaim. It's all about faith, [music]
hers and others. And on it, she even
says in one of the songs that she's hot
for God.
>> [music]
>> Wow, if that doesn't make God cool, then
I don't know what does.
Um
>> Rosalía is very cool.
>> [laughter]
>> Um but what about you, Lauren? I'm
curious if any of this has led
to you rethinking your position on faith
and established religion.
>> That's a big question.
Um, the short answer is I I'm not
religious. I do not attend a house of
worship.
I have not gone back to the faith of my
family and my childhood.
>> Mhm.
>> You know, I still pray. I don't know
what or whom I'm praying to, but the
fact that my job explores these issues
has given me the chance to really
examine and to think [clears throat]
deeply about the ideas that I grew up
with.
>> Mhm.
>> And in a way it's brought me closer to
my parents.
>> I think we need [music] to
talk about some of the articles more cuz
>> Each week I write a newsletter called
Believing.
And every Sunday whatever I write
becomes something for us to talk about.
>> the documenting [music]
is a job, but your heart
and your soul are always, [music] you
know, precious to me and and
>> And while we still don't see eye to eye,
>> I think I've heard from you and Dad
saying you see this as [music] part of
my, in your view, mission on this earth,
which is flattering cuz I know that
comes from a really meaningful place for
you. I think I see it differently. I'm a
journalist and
>> we have found a way to connect again
>> [music]
>> about something that for a long time
really drove us apart.
>> I love you.
>> Love you. Get better.
>> Okay. Thanks, Mom. Bye.
>> Bye.
Lauren, thank you so much.
>> Thank you so much. I've had so much fun
[music]
in this conversation.
>> We'll be right [music] back.
>> [music]
>> Here's what else you need to know today.
On Monday, President Trump mocked Iran's
response [music] to his latest peace
proposal as un serious and said it had
imperiled the ceasefire between the two
countries.
>> For the time being, the ceasefire
remains in place.
>> No, it's
unbelievably weak, I would say. I would
call it the weakest
>> [music]
>> right now
after reading the piece of garbage they
sent us. I didn't even finish
>> Iran called its [music] response, quote,
generous and responsible, a description
that Trump flatly [music]
rejected.
>> I would say the ceasefire is on massive
life support where the doctor walks in
and says
sir, your loved one has approximately a
1% chance
of living.
>> Yeah.
>> [music]
>> This is really
>> And
Democrats in Virginia are appealing to
the US Supreme Court to save a new
congressional map approved by voters
that was thrown out last week [music] by
a state court.
It's a last-ditch attempt to preserve a
redistricting plan that created four new
Democratic-leaning [music]
House districts before the midterm
elections.
In its surprise decision, the state
court ruled [music] that the
redistricting process violated
Virginia's constitution.
Because the [music] case revolves around
state law, it's unclear if the Supreme
Court will agree to hear the appeal.
Today's episode was produced by [music]
Auster Chaturvedi. It was edited by
Michael Benoît
and contains original music by Marion
Lozano, [music]
Dan Powell, and Alicia but YouTube.
Our theme music [music] is by Wonderly.
This episode was engineered by Alyssa
Moxley.
Special thanks to Rachel Quester, Nick
Pittman, Chris Wood, Kyle [music]
Grondillo, and Sophia Lehm.
>> [music]
>> That's it for The Daily.
I'm Michael Barbaro.
See you tomorrow.
>> [music]